heavy rainfall. Heavy rainfall results in leaching out all soluble material of top layer of soil. These are
generally found in Western ghats, Eastern ghats and hilly areas of northeastern states that receive heavy
rainfall. Forest soils occur on the slopes of mountains and hills in Himalayas, Western Ghats and Eastern
Ghats. These generally consist of large amounts of dead leaves and other organic matter called humus.

Cratons

Cratons are a specific kind of continental crust made up of a top
layer called platform and an older layer called basement. A shield
is the part of a craton where basement rock crops out of the
ground, and it is relatively the older and more stable section,
unaffected by plate tectonics. SUI82]

The Indian Craton can be divided into five major cratons as such:

= Aravalli Craton (Marwar-Mewar Craton or Western
Indian Craton): Covers Rajasthan as well as western
and southern Haryana. It comprises Mewar Craton in the
east and Marwar Craton in the west. It is limited by the
Great Boundary Fault in the east, sandy Thar Desert in
the Thar desert in the west, Indo-ganetic alluvium in the
north, Son-Narmada-Tapti in the south. It mainly has
quartzite, marble, pelite, greywacke and extinct volcanos
exposed in Aravalli-Delhi Orogen. Malani Igneous Suite
is the largest in India and third largest igneous suite in
the world.

Bundelkand Craton, covers 26,00 km? in the
Bundelkhand region of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya
Pradesh and forms the basis of the Malwa Plateau. It is
limited by the Aravalli in the west, Narmada river and
Satpura range in the south, and Indo-Gantetic alluvium
in the north. It is similar to the Aravali Craton, which used
to be a single craton before being divided into two with the evolution of Hindoli and
Mahakoshal belts at the margins of two cratons.

= Dharwar Craton (Karnataka Craton), 3.4 - 2.6 Ga, granite-greenstone terrain covers the
state of Karnataka and parts of eastern and southern Maharashtra state, and forms the
basis of the southern end of the Deccan Plateau. In 1886 it was divided into two tectonic
blocks, namely Eastern Dharwar Craton (EDC) and Western Dharwar Craton (WDC).

= Singhbhum Craton, 4,000 km? area which primarily covers Jharkhand as well as parts of
Odisha, northern Andhra Pradesh, northern Telangana and eastern Maharashtra. It is limited
by the Chhota Nagpur Plateau to the north, Eastern Ghats to the southeast, Bastar Craton
to southwest and alluvium plain to the east.

= Bastar Craton (Bastar-Bhandara Craton), primarily covers Chhattisgarh and forms the basis
of the Chhota Nagpur Plateau. It is a remnant of 3.4-3.0 Ga old TTG gneisses of five types.
It is subdivided into Kotri-Dongagarh Orogen and the Rest of Bastar Craton. It is limited by

 

   

Malani Igneous Suite, largest in
India and third largest igneous suite
in the world, at Jodhpur near
Mehrangarh Fort.

